On March 15, 2014, two Dutch students
boarded a plane from Amsterdam to Costa Rica.
Like any recent graduate, 21 year old Kris
Kremer and 22 year old Lisanne Froon were
excited students ready to see the world after
graduation. The two had spent a considerable
amount of time saving money and wanted to
enjoy this vacation as a part of their gap
year. When they arrived in Costa Rica, their
itinerary was full and they had a plan to
enjoy themselves and integrate themselves into the
local communities. From Costa Rica, they continued
across the Southern border into the country of
Panama and made a quick stop at Bocas del Toro,
near the coast before leaving for their final
destination, Boquete, which was further inland.
If the two weren’t enjoying the
food, drinks, or sightseeing,
they would be taking Spanish lessons and
volunteering in a local children’s school.
Lisanne and Kris had both recently graduated
from different universities in the Netherlands
where they both lived, they both kept
diaries, and were described as normal
intelligent university women looking for a nice
vacation to relax. Nevertheless, on March 29th,
after arriving in Boquete, they settled in with a
host family they’d made arrangements to live with
for the duration of their stay. It was also
around this time that the two decided to explore
Boquete, we can see in pictures they took that
they seemed to be having fun, visiting flower
markets, and going out to eat.
But, one thing they hadn’t done yet was see the
trails and hiking areas around Boquete, so a few
days later, on April 1st, the two were dropped
off at the start of the Pianista trail by a taxi.
This 8 km trail is well-known, there’s really only
one path to follow towards its summit although
it's said to be somewhat dangerous because of
its steepness and its sometimes muddy terrain.
Nevertheless, at around 11 am, the two
began their hike. Both only decided to wear
a tanktop and shorts and brought a light
backpack with some water, their camera,
and most likely some snacks indicating they were
expecting a short, leisurely hike. Pictures they
took with their camera show that their ascent up
to the summit was going as planned. Although, some
say that these pictures have been photoshopped
by a third party or the two look anxious,
but we’ll get to that later. For now, they’re seen
making their way through the forested section of
the trail before finally making it to the summit,
where they take a string of selfies with the view.
Now, the summit of the trail called El Mirador
is usually the spot where hikers turn around and
head back towards Boquete, as there’s no other
trail that loops hikers back around. However,
for some reason, pictures show that the two had
kept walking away from Boquete, past what is
called the Continental Divide and further into
the forest. Various sources claim that Lisanne
and Kris had researched the trail beforehand so
it’s unclear why they kept walking, maybe they
thought that there was more nature to be seen
ahead, or maybe they just weren’t tired yet.
Regardless of how the decision was made, the two
kept walking into what is called the “Caribbean
side of Panama”. It’s been said that this side of
the trail is a common route for drug trafficking
but others claim it's just a route where locals
and their cattle typically pass by. Image 505
shows Kris walking through a ravine just past the
summit, the location being confirmed by others who
have walked the trail. A few seconds later,
image 506 is taken, showing the walls of the
ravine. And around 30 minutes after that, the last
two pictures are taken, depicting Kris crossing a
stream. Image 508 shows her looking back at the
camera and would be the last picture confirmed
to have been taken by the women. But this is the
point in the story where things take a dark turn.
In the next 2 and half hours of the day, something
happened to the girls, something bad enough that
they would call 112, the Dutch version of 911, at
4:39 pm from Kris’ iPhone, but no connection was
made because of poor reception. Twelve minutes
later, another attempt was made to call 112,
this time with Lisanne’s Samsung, but again,
it didn’t go through. Around an hour later,
both phones were powered off and in the following
days, 911 and 112 would be called 7 times.
Meanwhile in Boquete, the mother of the host
family, Miriam Guerra, notices that they haven’t
returned from their hike, however she didn’t think
too much of it, as students usually stay out late
and enjoy Boquete’s nightlife. However the next
morning, on April 2nd, a tour guide that the
girls had previously booked an 8 am appointment
with, got concerned after they didn't show up.
This tour guide then went to visit the house
where they were staying, and upon finding that
they weren't there either, he notified the
girls’ parents in Holland. At which point,
the parents went to Dutch police and a few
hours later, the tour guide did the same in
Boquete to report the missing girls. By this
point, small private search teams had already
started looking for Kris and Lisanne, including
the tour guide who’d reported them missing.
He’d also informed Sinaproc, a national civil
protection system, about the girls’ disappearance.
Even on April 2, phone records show that the
girls’ phones were still active and being used,
911 was called multiple times, Lisanne’s Samsung
was used to open the weather app, and curiously,
Kris’ iPhone 4 was used to search this up on
WhatsApp. It seems as if she was trying to search
up the mother of the host family, Miriam, before
the phone is switched off without any further
action. By the end of the day, Lisanne’s Samsung
had reached 1% and it, too, was powered off.
By the next day, Sinaproc had started their
searches on the Pianista trail and trails
surrounding it, various sources indicated that a
helicopter and small plane had been used to help
in the search, but since the Caribbean side of the
trail was covered in trees, it didn’t help much.
Searches continued throughout the next
few days, more volunteers were added
to search teams and more helicopters were
dispatched, but with no significant progress.
However, this is when the first signs of foul play
are noticed, phone records would later show that
on April 5th, Kris’ iPhone 4 was powered on but
the wrong or no passcode was put into the phone.
Over the next few days, this would happen over
77 times. On April 8th, 7 days after the girls
went missing, another batch of photos would
be taken, now dubbed “The Nighttime Photos”.
The first, image 511, believed to have been taken
around 1:30 am, shows the forest trees looking up,
with droplets of some kind scattering the picture,
some believe this is rain, while others think it's
water from a nearby waterfall. Now, it’s important
to mention that all the Nighttime Photos haven’t
been released to the public yet, so many chunks of
pictures are missing. The next photo, image 541,
seems to show one of the girls, maybe their
chin and cheekbone, looking up, or, as some
have pointed out, it could be a photo of Lisanne
smiling, as it matches well with a previous
picture of Lisanne. However, while it matches up
well with the edges of her face, we can see that
it doesn’t quite match up completely. From then
on, the nighttime pictures seem to just photograph
the forested area, the trees, terrain, and the
sky. But there are some pictures worth mentioning,
image 550 shows a branch with what seems to
be orange plastic bags tied to it. Some have
theorized that this was a marker of some sort,
to see if the girls were going in circles.
Another image shows what seems to be various
items on a rock, a mirror, and strap of some sort,
and paper, and some have said this is how the
girls had been trying to create an SOS sign.
Some have even cleverly matched parts of paper in
this picture to other pictures taken days earlier,
for example, this piece of paper on the rock
matches a map that the girls had been reading
days before the hike. And finally, image 580
shows what seems to be the back of Kris’ head,
although, for hair that’s been lost in the
forest for 7 days, it looks eerily clean.
No head injury, blood, or even water seems
to have touched the hair, even though in
the earlier nighttime pictures, it seems to
be raining. Meanwhile, private search teams,
and Sinaproc had little luck in finding any trace
of the girls. And as more and more search teams
had come up empty handed, people started losing
hope that the girls were in the forest at all.
However, around two months after the
girls’ disappearance, on June 11th,
it was reported in various news articles that a
local woman had stumbled upon the girls’ backpack
down the Culebre River. It was found to be mostly
dry with authorities' first real clues as to what
happened to the girls. In the backpack, the
Canon digital camera, both the girls’ phones,
two bras, and $88 in cash was found, among other
things. Although, what was odd was that despite
having been washed down the river for multiple
kilometers, the bag and its contents were found
mostly undamaged. Furthermore, 13 DNA samples were
reported to have been taken from the backpack,
and of those samples, actual DNA was only
found on three of them. It was described
as being from at least two females, two
males, and multiple unknowns. However,
none of the DNA samples matched that of Lisanne,
Kris, or anyone in criminal DNA databases.
Some have theorized that the girls’ DNA could have
been washed off in the river, meaning there’s also
a possibility a third party’s DNA could have also
been washed off. Nevertheless, searchers focused
on the area where the backpack was found and in
a few days, they began to find human remains.
Shoes with bones inside of them were found, along
with part of a pelvic bone and a jeans short.
An autopsy was then performed on the bones and
confirmed that the foot was of Lisanne, and the
pelvic and jean shorts was of Kris. However, this
discovery led to even more unanswered questions.
Autopsy of the bones inside the shoe show that
the foot was broken cleanly, no signs of cutting,
hacking, gunshots or teeth were found. From this,
the cause of death couldn’t be determined. Autopsy
of Kris’ pelvic bone was even more strange as only
a piece of it was found. Most pelvic fractures
happen during high-speed car collisions or falls
from great height which would imply Kris endured a
powerful force. Forensic experts later found that
the bone had been bleached in some way and traces
of phosphorus were discovered. Natural bleaching
from the sun or the soil is very unlikely,
as the level of bleaching in such a short
time can’t be explained from natural elements.
In the following months, more fragmented remains
would be found, later confirmed to be Lisanne’s
tibia and femur with pieces of tissue still
attached, and Kris’ rib bone, also bleached.
Further searches and discoveries didn’t
uncover much about what happened to the girls,
and only further confirmed that they were indeed,
dead. So, investigators turned to the evidence
they already had, focusing on the pictures
first. From the image file names, it can be
seen that IMG_508 is the last daytime picture, and
IMG_511 is the first nighttime picture. Now, we
know IMG_510 exists but just hasn’t been released
to the public. However, IMG_509 can’t be found.
When you take a picture with the Canon camera
that the girls were using, let’s say IMG_40,
and delete that picture, the next picture you take
will fill that gap, so if IMG_509 can’t be found
on the camera, it implies that someone deleted
the picture after the nighttime pictures were
taken and used a computer to do it. So, where did
IMG_509 go? All the natural causes can mostly be
dismissed, the camera couldn’t accidentally miss a
number and its memory card still had space. so the
prevailing theory is that someone deliberately
deleted IMG_509 for whatever reason. Maybe it
contained incriminating evidence of a third party
or their real location. For now, we’ll never know.
Then was the issue of the nighttime photos.
Some believe that they were only taken to
produce a flash, and act like a flashlight for
the lost girls. However, others have pointed out
that in a lot of the pictures, the same plant
is photographed, meaning that the girls were
staying in one spot while taking pictures.
In this case, flash would not be needed.
Others have pointed out that maybe the flash was
used to try and signal searchers or helicopters,
although it’s unlikely that Sinaproc would send
people or helicopters in the forest at night.
Even if they did, the flash usually doesn’t
get too far, as it’s blocked by rocks or
plants. Yelling, if they could, would’ve been
a better way at signaling searchers. However,
this way of thinking might be a little
retrospective, as the girls probably did
whatever they thought would work, regardless
of whether it was a good idea. Maybe the girls
were trying to show something around them, maybe
their location, but if that was the case, why not
take pictures of more identifying features, rather
than mostly just the sky. And why not take a quick
video with their camera or their phones? In fact,
some have questioned, if the girls were just lost,
why they didn’t record a video explaining what
happened, or write a note on their phones. Since
some pictures had been taken in the same spot, a
small reconstruction can be made of the landscape.
The location of the night time pictures,
to this day, haven’t been fully confirmed.
Theories as to what happened to the girls
generally fall under two categories,
the lost theory or the foul play theory. The
lost theory usually explains that the girls
found themselves deep in the forest and didn’t
know a way out. Some say that one of the two
girls might have gotten injured, at which point
they called 911, or the other girl had left to get
help before meeting a similar fate. The girls did
come from the Netherlands and most likely didn’t
have a lot of good wilderness experience, so it
is possible that they had walked too far into
the forest as the sun would have been setting, and
panic would’ve started to sink in. At that point,
they might’ve gotten disoriented and started
making irrational decisions. Authorities involved
in the search usually subscribe to this theory,
the prominent theory of Dutch investigators is
that the girls had continued walking further
into the forest, and had tried to cross one
of the cable bridges, where they accidentally
fell into the river and got swept away. However,
this doesn’t explain how the skeletons of the two
girls got broken up like they did, remember that
only the foot and leg bones of Lisanne were found,
and the pelvic and rib bones of Kris. Panamanian
authorities initially called the disappearance a
homicide, but later came to a similar conclusion,
saying that the girls likely drowned in a river,
or were attacked by wild animals. Although, this
doesn’t explain all the incorrect PIN attempts
on the girls’ phones, how Kris’ bones ended up
bleached, why searchers still haven’t found all
their remains, and contradicts the discovery of
no teeth marks on Lisanne’s bones. Kris’ parents
who’ve walked the trail, have also said that
there’s really only one route to take, and that
there’s no confusing junctions or other trails.
The foul play theory is much more interesting. It
explains that the girls had run into an unknown
person or group of people on or before the trail,
where they were then either kidnapped or killed.
This would mean that Kris and Lisanne did not
meet their end through natural means. Sinaproc’s
leader of the search teams stated that they combed
through every zone of the forest where the girls
may have ended up, over 25 trails were checked,
yet nothing except scattered remains were found.
It’s also unlikely that the girls didn’t run
into anyone that could’ve helped them on the
trail if they were lost, as the route they took is
frequently used by hunters, farmers, and locals.
This theory would also explain why no large
remains were found, the missing or deleted photos
from the camera, Kris’ bleached bones, and all
the incorrect PIN attempts on the girls’ phones.
Something that supports the foul play theory is
the sudden and suspicious deaths of various people
involved in the case. A taxi driver, who came
forward as the one who had picked up and brought
Kris and Lisanne to the start of the Pianista
trail, was found drowned around a year later,
under unexplained circumstances. According only to
these eyewitness statements, the story goes that,
after dropping off Kris and Lisanne at the
Pianista trail, a local gang had stopped
the taxi driver and asked him where he’d
dropped the girls off. After telling them,
the gang had followed the girls and convinced
them to come back to their house to party,
but when they got there, them and the girls got
into an altercation and the girls were killed.
The gang then tried to cover it up by taking
the nighttime photos themselves and faking
the phone activity, as well as trying to
bleach the bones to speed up decomposition.
People who had come forward with this story
had also ended up dead, making it one of the
most popular foul play theories of the case.
However, for this theory, all we can go on is
statements from various people with no concrete
evidence that any of this actually happened.
If the girls did get kidnapped, why would the
perpetrator let them call 911 that many times, or
let them take the nighttime photos? Some have said
that after killing the girls, the perpetrators had
likely wanted to make it look like they just
got lost, so they took the nighttime pictures,
and scattered the remains and the backpack
themselves so the authorities would stop
searching. A version of this theory states that
the daytime pictures could even be photoshopped,
to conceal any third party or incriminating
evidence. But again, Lisanne’s foot was found
to have been broken cleanly with no signs of
any cutting, so how could this have happened?
The complex and contradicting nature of
this case is the reason it has captured
public attention for so long. A disappearance,
documented victims themselves using a set of
mysterious and cryptic photos is a case that has
stumped detectives and internet sleuths alike.